---
title: How To Survive Zoom University
published: true
---

Going back to school this Fall is going to be unlike any semester that has come before us. Most universities across the country have switched the bulk of their instruction online. College students have started joking that they are now attending ‘Zoom University’, a reference to the widely used video conferencing software utilized for online teaching. Even though half of the spring semester took place in a virtual format, this Fall will be the first time many instructors must design their courses in an online format. With this change, has come widespread uneasiness about the upcoming semester. Some students have even chosen to take a gap year rather than deal with the new virtual reality of education. Faced with the approach of my own university’s start date, I began to dwell on the hurdles my peers and I will confront as pupils of ‘Zoom University’. Through my conversations with friends, I noticed that nearly all their concerns centered around isolation or being alone. Yet, instead of worrying about the well-known mental health consequences of solitude, my classmates exhibited uneasiness about the academic effects. Through collective brainstorming, I have come up with a list of tips that I believe will act not merely as a survival guide, but as a thrival guide to ‘Zoom University’.

First thing is first, what exactly are the academic consequences of social distancing? If you ask anyone who has attended any form of school, they will tell you that friends and acquaintances played an important role in their success. In a typical classroom environment, students are expected to work together and learn from their peers. College students especially, rely heavily on study groups to share class notes, work through homework, peer review papers, and cramming for exams. These groups are usually formed through in-person class interactions, doings that are not going to be a possibility this year. I, like other students, endured a couple online classes pre-pandemic, and except for the exceptionally well planned, did not enjoy my experiences. Students in online classes tend not to reach out to each other as much for help, resulting in them struggling through the course work frustrated, and alone. It is this form of academic isolation that will be the biggest threat to classroom performance this year. 

That brings me to my first tip/suggestion:

#### Tip #1: Drop a link to a GorupMe chat
During one of the first class meetings, drop a link to a GroupMe conversation, or one using a similar platform, in the Zoom chat. You can include it with a message that says something like “Hey, I thought it would be nice to have a group chat for questions, homework help, study group, etc. Feel free to add yourself to the chat if you want to join”. If the class is large and you get a lot of interested participants, the resulting group can be broken up into several. You could even try to group people up by study habits, interests, or platform preference. I think you will be surprised by how many people respond. Many students will be grasping for connections and grateful that someone else took the uncomfortable step of reaching out first.

#### Tip #2: Reach out to your Professor
If you are too shy to drop a GroupMe link, reach out to your professor and inquire if they could help facilitate peer group formation in the classroom. Perhaps they can assign optional study groups that can serve as a potential resource if students so desire. This would get rid of the awkwardness that comes with being the initiator. Professors could take an even more hands off approach, and merely suggest that students reach out to each other and form groups. This will grant that social permission to reach out, again eliminating the potential awkwardness. 

#### Tip #3: Turn your Webcam On
This next suggestion is one that I know many students, including me, will hesitate to do. This past spring when all of my classes transitioned online, I never turned my camera on, mainly because none of my peers did either. There were some days where I was glad my classmates could not see me in my pajamas, shoveling snacks into my mouth, but I had struggled to maintain focus in class pre-pandemic and staring at black backgrounds with names did not make that problem any easier. Some professors have gone head and decided to require webcams to be turned on this semester. Even though the request is minorly annoying, I appreciate the effort on the instructor’s part. Students will feel less alone in a class where they can actually see the faces of their classmates. So regardless if your teacher requires it, you should seriously consider turning your camera on. You could end up being the first domino that starts a chain reaction, resulting in even more students turning on their cameras.

#### Tip #4: Turn your Mic on
If you have decided not to turn your camera on, then at the very least you should use your microphone. Experts have found that students who actively participate in class tend to absorb more of the material and record a better overall experience [1]. Public speaking makes me uneasy, but even I have resolved to implement this behavior change. The nature of online learning makes class participation that much more important, so I know if I am to succeed and have a better online experience, I have to bite the bullet, turn my mic on, and speak up! Speaking up has other benefits as well. It may help you form connections in the class, as other students will tend to be drawn to those that make themselves known, and you might even get kudo points with the professor for being so engaged.

#### Tip #5: Reach out to others in your Major
Outside of forging classroom connections, make a point to reach out to others that you know in your major. Think of peers you have had previous classes with, or maybe a friend of a friend who you know is in your major. Ask them about their schedule to see if you have any classes that line up. This can be one of the best ways to form instant connections before a class even begins!  A text along the lines of, “Hey, I know it’s been awhile. Hope your summer went well/you’re doing well. With classes being online this semester I’m trying to figure out if anyone I know is taking the same classes as me so we can struggle together *insert smiling sweating emoji here*. What classes are you taking?” You can also just drop them your schedule and ask, “any overlap?” Even if you are unable to uncover any concurrences, you may find someone in your class but just in a different section.

#### Tip #6: Join a club
This tip may sound odd for an online semester, nevertheless, if you are really struggling to think of other people in your major, or perhaps you are new to campus, consider joining a club this semester. I know the extracurricular experience is not going to be the same this year, but many organizations are continuing to meet virtually and are still looking for new members. If you are worried about the time commitment, consider how the pandemic has alleviated some of the usual responsibilities. For example, you no longer have to drive to meetings or campus events, making attendance easier in addition to eliminating the time spent on your commute. Remember though, to get the most of a virtual club experience you are going to have to make the same efforts as outlined above. Turn the camera on, speak, and ENGAGE with the other people in the Zoom session. 

So while I do have my concerns about attending school during a pandemic, I do not feel that our situation warrants any additional anxiety than that typically brought about by a new school year. Each year presents its unique challenges, and this one will be no different. As students, we need to make a conscious effort to interact and participate in our new, sterile online environments. Though it may feel uncomfortable at first, the payoff will be great. Not only will your academic performance improve, but so too will your mental health when you don’t feel like you are struggling through Zoom University alone.

#### References
[1] Valiente, C., Lemery-Chalfant, K., Swanson, J., & Reiser, M. (2008). Prediction of children's academic competence from their effortful control, relationships, and classroom participation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(1), 67–77.
